ISGUR: Not going to change the balance of the court. She's well within, sort of, the Breyer to Sotomayor range there. And Republicans have the wind at their backs when it comes to 2022. The last thing they want is to get stuck in the mire of a Supreme Court nomination. They want this to be a referendum on Joe Biden.

Now, the problem is, that may be the interest of the overall party. Individual senators on the Senate Judiciary have their own incentives to try to, you know, spruce up their name ID that they're fighters.

You know, I think the number one question she'll face from Republicans is actually not that much about her. It's "You are one of the most qualified judges in the country to be on the Supreme Court, but a lot of people who are qualified weren't even considered for this position because of their race. Do you think that that's right?"

(LAUGHTER)

STEPHANOPOULOS: Does she get Republican votes?

ISGUR: Yes.

STEPHANOPOULOS: Donna, let's talk about the State of the Union. You saw the question I asked Jen Psaki earlier. The president is coming into the State of the Union in a pretty tough position, 37 percent approval. The Democrats are facing real headwinds heading into the midterms.

What does he need to do Tuesday night?

BRAZILE: Well, first of all, George, I call it 20/80/80, 20 percent looking back, 40 percent talking about the president. I mean, he is going to come before the nation at a time when there are dark clouds of war in Ukraine, the breadbasket of Europe. So he's going to have to talk about the present crisis, not just in Ukraine, but also inflation, also what's happening at the gas pump.

He also needs to do 40 percent in terms of the future. Where do we go from here?

I mean, he's passed several important pieces of legislation. Where do we go on the pandemic? Where do we go in terms of, you know, competitiveness with China. There's a lot on his plate. But the first thing he should do is not talk to the men and women in Congress. I love them. You know, I used to be a Hill staffer. Talk to the American people because they want to hear from their president. And project strength.

STEPHANOPOULOS: That is the biggest opportunity for every president every single year. It's the day -- it's a huge audience. How does the president capture it?

ISGUR: I think the worst thing the president can do is stand up there and tell the American people something that is not their reality. If he stands up there and says "The state of our union is strong," people are going to roll their eyes. And at a time where his approval numbers are not only low, but they're getting lower, he needs to stand up there and level with the American people and let them recognize that he understands reality.

The state of our Union is challenged. It’s not great. Inflation, gas prices, Ukraine -- recognize that reality and bring the American people with him about how tough this is and the mistakes that he's made maybe in Afghanistan and other places.

I think that's actually this reset moment that he could have. But I just don't believe the White House will do it.

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC “THIS WEEK” ANCHOR: Jon, it's always tricky for presidents in challenging times to get that balance right between optimism and recognizing the reality that most Americans are facing.

JONATHAN KARL, ABC NEWS CHIEF WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT: Let's face it, George, State of the Union Address is the biggest audience that he will face. But State of the Union Addresses rarely move the needle much.

And Joe Biden needs to change the trajectory here. His approval ratings are at the lowest point of his presidency, truly grim. If you look at this approval rating, it is virtually in this -- indistinguishable from where Donald Trump was at the various low points of his presidency.

And more concerning for Joe Biden and for Democrats generally, is if you look at our latest poll out today, the percentage of voters saying that they will vote for Republicans in the midterm elections is at the highest level that we have seen since 2010. And you know what happened in 2010. 2010 is when Republicans won 63 seats and swept control of the House in the Tea Party wave.

So, Biden needs to change the trajectory. He needs to acknowledge the challenges and present some kind of a vision that shows he has a plausible plan for dealing with the challenges facing this country.

STEPHANOPOULOS: And, Rachel, when the president enters the chamber on Tuesday night, he'll be facing a Democratic Party which is feeling a bit besieged. Right now, you’re seeing more than 30 retirements in the House, who are saying they’re not going to run again. Republicans, as Sarah said, do feel they have the winds at their back.

RACHEL SCOTT, ABC NEWS CONGRESIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Oh, definitely, George. A 30-year high when it comes to Democratic retirements, especially in the House. The number right now is at 41.

And so, Democrats here, they're looking at the challenges. They're hearing from voters in their district, especially some of these vulnerable Democrats, Abigail Spanberger in Virginia.

Hearing about concerns about inflation. Just look at our latest poll. Six out of ten Americans saying they're feeling a hardship from inflation.

This is also a party right now that is trying to figure out the messaging. They're looking at some of the domestic agenda that has been stalled. There has been a lot of private conversations happening behind the scenes with Democrats focusing on what they can -- have gotten done rather than what they have not, and trying to change the gears ahead of this critical midterm elections when they’re trying to keep the House and the Senate.

STEPHANOPOULOS: It does appear, Donna, that Build Back Better is pretty dead.

DONNA BRAZILE, ABC NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: I don't think it's dead, George. Look, anything can be revived especially in politics. And I just want to say, Scripture tells us that, you know, whipping endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.

Sarah, I know that there's a great challenge not to appear joyful, but you know what? Compared to where we were a year ago, two years ago, four years, I think we're in better shape.

ISGUR: That's not true for a lot of Americans, though.

BRAZILE: No, no, hold on -- look, I can't speak for every American. I can only speak for myself.

But the fact is more companies are onshoring their jobs. Intel is going to start making chips in Texas and Ohio.

Tell the good news so that the American people know we're fighting to make their lives better. That’s what I mean by whipping may endure for a night, because joy can come in the morning if we believe that America’s greatest days are ahead of us.

That's what the State of the Union is. It's not just projecting the pain, but the passion of what makes us Americans.

I’m thinking about the people in Ukraine. The grandmothers with the AK-40s.

George, I don’t even know what that look like, okay? If you put that on the candy store, I’m like, I don’t know any of those. But the fact that they're fighting, they're defiant, that is what this moment is about. And I think the president can project that on Tuesday.

STEPHANOPOULOS: And, Jon, there's no question the president's speech is going to be transformed by Ukraine, by the fact that, you know, the war is going on as he's speaking.

KARL: Absolutely, an extraordinary moment, George. We see the aggression that -- by Russia. We see a threat to the world order like we have not seen since World War II.

This will have in a sense the feeling of a war time speech and in face of this aggression, this would be a moment of unity, you would expect a moment of unity. And yet you see the previous president coming out, Donald Trump, and as you mentioned in your interview with Tom Cotton, essentially praising Vladimir Putin, condemning the president of the United States.

This is not normal. It's not right. It's not what you would expect to see in a time of national crisis. So, he's going to be facing a chamber that will have -- where he's looking at a Republican Party that is deeply divided on this question, and has an opportunity here to channel some of President Zelensky, channel some of the notion of standing up in face of the type of aggression that we haven't seen in more than a half century.

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, ABC “THIS WEEK” ANCHOR: Sarah Isgur, this does seem to be a moment of crisis for the Republican Party. It’s why you got President Trump out there calling Vladimir Putin smart, saying he has no message for him. You got Tucker Carlson, probably the leader of the media in the Republican Party, who did an about face this week after praising Putin, and refusing to condemn what seemed to be happening in Ukraine.

I want to ask you what I asked you off camera. I honestly -- and this is an honest question. I don't understand why someone like Tom Cotton, Senator Tom Cotton, who has been stalwart against President Putin for years, is unwilling to condemn that kind of rhetoric from Donald Trump.

SARAH ISGUR, ABC NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: Because it doesn’t end, right? We saw this in 2015. If you end up responding to Donald Trump, then you respond to Donald Trump the entirety of your candidacy or whatever you’re doing.

STEPHANOPOULOS: It's the most important issue out there.

ISGUR: And Tom Cotton certainly was showing differences that he had with President Trump in terms of policy. But, look, you have Vice President Pence, Mitch McConnell, lots of people breaking from President Trump, but sort of that higher level. And what they have in common is that they don't need to raise money right now. Twenty-two cents of every dollar being raised on the Republican side is going into Donald Trump's PACs. It has such a far-ranging effect that we’re not even thinking about, that f you want to raise small dollar online donations, the vast of majority of where these candidates are getting their money, it's either going to Donald Trump or you have to rent those lists, emails, et cetera from Trump lists.

And so, you got to have a Trump friendly message if you want to raise that money. It's a huge problem for the Republican Party, because those high level people can break with him all they want, but if the candidates have to stay close to Donald Trump in order to be competitive, it affects who can run and it certainly affects who can win.

STEPHANOPOULOS: The rest of the world does seem to be uniting behind Ukraine right now.

DONNA BRAZILE, ABC NEWS CONTRIBUTOR: And also, all the former presidents have come out and condemned Mr. Putin's aggression.

George, look, I can't speak for the Republican Party and whether they're going to break from the former president. But I can tell you, the American people are united and standing behind the Ukrainian people and our NATO alliances. I think that is what matters in this moment.

STEPHANOPOULOS: Hey, Rachel Scott, what more can we expect from Congress? There seems to be bipartisan support now for tougher sanctions, even as the president seems to be getting ahead of that over the weekend.

RACHEL SCOTT, ABC NEWS CONGRESSIONAL CORRESPONDENT: Yeah, and this is something that both Democrats and Republicans actually wanted to get done before they left on recess. But there were sharp disagreements on how far to go, how soon to impose sanctions.

And so, it just didn't happen. All that amounted to was a strongly-worded resolution essentially just condemning Russian aggression. So, I think now that senators are back on Capitol Hill this week, we can start to hear more of these calls for imposing harsher sanctions, trying to get Democrats and Republicans on the same page. But, again, they've struggled to remain united on this front when it comes to responding to what is happening in Ukraine, what’s happening with Russian aggression.

But definitely expect to hear more pressure even from Democrats. We started hearing it from Senator Blumenthal and other Democrats who said the president just should have acted sooner. He should have imposed those harsher sanctions earlier.

STEPHANOPOULOS: Jon, what does this mean for the Republican Party going forward?

KARL: Well, the Republican Party is divided on foreign policy in a way that it hasn't been since World War II. I mean, you do have strong voices in the Republican Party that channel Ronald Reagan, that are stridently anti-Russian aggression, anti-Putin.

But you also have prominent voices in the party that are frankly cheering him on. You know, as you pointed out, it's not just members of Congress. It's obviously the former president and some of the loudest voices in -- on the conservative side. I mean, I don't know if it's conservatively, but on the Republican side, actually not just saying that it doesn't matter, but praising Vladimir Putin. It's incredible.