The beginning of the Russian military operation in Ukraine marked the end of the unipolar world. Moscow is opposed by the combined forces of the West, but no one, even in NATO, has any doubts that the goals of the operation will be achieved, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu said on Tuesday at the opening of the 10th Moscow Conference on International Security.

The minister stressed that the operation in Ukraine dispelled the myth of a Western "superweapon" capable of changing the situation at the front, called allegations about the possibility of using nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory as conjectures and provocations, and also stated the collapse of plans to isolate Russia.

TASS collected the main statements of Shoigu.

On the end of the unipolar world
The unconditional domination of the United States and its allies is a thing of the past - multipolarity has become a reality: "February 24, 2022, the start of a special military operation in Ukraine, marked the end of the unipolar world."

"A multipolar world is the reality of today. The transition from the dominance of one global leader to several centers of gravity is not easy, but it creates real conditions for the development of sovereign states."

On the role of the West in Ukraine
"In Ukraine, Russian military personnel are confronted by the combined forces of the West, who control the leadership of this country in a hybrid war against Russia." This is not only about financial assistance, the transfer of weapons and intelligence and training of the Ukrainian military - their actions are coordinated by foreign advisers, and "the use of weapons is carried out under the control of Western experts."

"NATO's efforts are aimed at prolonging the agony of the Kiev regime. At the same time, we know for certain that no one in NATO has any doubts that the goals of the special military operation set by the Russian leadership will be achieved, and plans to achieve a strategic and economic weakening of Russia are failing."

About the Western "superweapon"
"The special military operation dispelled the myth of the 'superweapon' that the West is supplying to Ukraine and which is capable of radically changing the situation at the front. <...> And these weapons are being ground up in battles. They have not had a significant impact on the situation."

At the same time, the supply of Western weapons to Kyiv means that the responsibility for its inhumane use, the death of the inhabitants of Donbass lies with the countries of the West.

In turn, Russian weapons "confirmed their best qualities in battles," while Moscow carefully studies captured samples and takes into account their qualities in order to improve combat methods and increase the effectiveness of its own weapons.

About the colonial approach
"The role of Kiev in the approach of the West to the conduct of hostilities is reduced to the supply of manpower, which is seen as expendable material. This explains the huge loss of personnel of the armed forces and formations of the territorial defense of Ukraine."

The Western attitude towards Ukrainian losses confirms that NATO is pursuing "exclusively selfish interests": "Obviously, the colonial experience of Great Britain as the main sponsor of the Kiev regime was very useful to London in its work with the current leadership in Kiev."

About nuclear weapons in Ukraine
"From a military point of view, there is no need to use nuclear weapons in Ukraine to achieve the set goals. <...> Allegations about the possible use of chemical weapons in Ukraine are also absurd."

All these "information stuffing" and "information provocations" are aimed at diverting attention from the American military biological laboratories on the territory of Ukraine.

About NATO policy
"NATO has dropped its masks. The bloc's aggressive nature has ceased to be hidden behind formulations about the exclusively defensive orientation of coalition activities. Today, claims for global dominance are enshrined in the alliance's strategic planning documents."

The possible entry of Finland and Sweden into NATO will require a revision of approaches to the defense of Russian territory: "Some conclusions have already been made and enshrined in the updated Naval Doctrine <...>. Work in this area will continue."

About arms control
The experience of cooperation with the West in the field of arms control shows that its policy "does not imply the fulfillment of treaty obligations in the traditional sense," and this fact must be taken into account.

In particular, a "difficult situation" is developing with the START-3 treaty, which expires in 2026: "US statements that Russia must earn the right to continue dialogue with the United States do not hold water. Arms control is a two-way street ".

On threats in the Far East
The AUKUS alliance formed by Australia, the UK and the US, as well as plans to create an Australian nuclear submarine fleet, worsen the security situation in the Asia-Pacific region: "In a global dimension, the appearance of a nuclear fleet in Australia will give other states an excuse to start developing similar weapons. Pandora's box will open, the global nuclear arms race will resume."

It also cannot be ruled out that NATO's developments in joint nuclear planning and testing of the use of nuclear weapons will be transferred to the Far East: "The transfer of the practice of nuclear training from Europe will blow up the region. Although it can be assumed that this is precisely the goal set by the United States." 