"Russia has never stopped its efforts to avoid a World War", said the Foreign Minister of Moscow, Sergej Lavrov, interviewed by Giuseppe Brindisi for "Zona Bianca". For the first time, Putin's minister grants an interview to a European TV and attacks: "Western media always misrepresent what we say".
Will this war escalate into a nuclear war? - Lavrov replies: "Western mass media and western politicians misrepresent what is said by Russian institutions. When people talk about threats and they ask me how real these threats are, I always answer like this: Russia has never stopped efforts to reach the agreements that will ensure that no war develops. We proposed to our American colleagues that they repeat what Gorbachev and Reagan said in 1987 and accept a statement confirming that a nuclear war would have no winners. We failed to convince the Trump administration but the Biden administration agreed. And in 2021 in Geneva Putin and Biden accepted this statement, on our initiative. There was also a proposal from Putin to convene a summit of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council but the United States and Great Britain are slowing down".

 

How does Russia consider Italy today? - Lavrov replies: Italy is in the front line among those who not only adopt anti-Russian sanctions but also all initiatives in this sense. Unfortunately at the beginning it was a surprise but now we are used to the fact that Italy can be this too, maybe this is the truth, I don't know. It seemed to me that the Italian people and Italy had a slightly different approach to the world and to fairness and that they knew how to distinguish white from black. I don't want to be wrong here, some statements by some Italian politicians not to mention the press have really gone beyond good diplomatic norms and journalistic ethics".

 

Were the Russian missiles on Kiev during Guterres' visit a provocation? - Lavrov replies: "We have always warned when President Putin spoke about the start of this special operation that the targets would be military infrastructures located in Ukraine. And which are used to put pressure on the civilian population and are a threat to Russia. We attack military targets to deprive Ukrainian radicals and the Ukrainian regime of strengthening its war position. That is clear."

 

What are the unseen weapons announced by Putin? - Lavrov replies: "Everyone knows, three years ago President Putin presented new ultrasonic weapons that began to be the focus of our attention after the United States tore up the agreement against nuclear weapons. Then to President Putin he asked why this document had not been signed and that it would allow for a world peace and president bush jr said they wanted out of the agreement because they were worried about Iran and North Korea.So the ultrasonic weapons were developed because the US missile shield will be aimed at Russia and China, which is why these weapons were developed.

 

Will Russia declare total war on May 9? - Lavrov replies: "Our military does not plan actions based on a date. The rhythms depend on the need to minimize the risks for the civilian population and for the Russian military".

 

Are there Western mercenaries in Ukraine? - Lavrov answers: "All the polemics about the presence of mercenaries from the Wagner battalion serve to divert attention to what our Western colleagues are doing and the situation regarding the confrontation at the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol and the hysterical wishes of Zelensky, his entourage and its Western partners to get these people out, has to do with the fact that there are Western mercenaries and officers among the ranks of Ukrainian radicals."

 

Was there a massacre of civilians in Bucha? - Lavrov replies: "On March 30, the Russian soldiers left Bucha. The mayor of Bucha declared victory saying that Bucha had returned to normal life and then after three days they began to show these dead. I don't want to go into this aspect because it is so evident that it is a fake that any observer can tell it from the first glance".

 

Does Russia want Zelensky's surrender for peace? - Lavrov replies: "Zelensky can bring peace if he stops giving criminal orders to his Nazi battalions and forces them to stop hostilities. We don't want him to surrender, we want him to give the order to stop hostilities and leave all civilians. Our goal is not regime change in Ukraine, this is an American specialty, usually they deal with this all over the world, while we only want to ensure the safety of people in the