In Washington, US intelligence officials warned that the conflict would be prolonged and escalation
remained possible. On May 10, Director of National Intelligence Haines provided another intelligence assessment of the ongoing war in a Testimony on Global Threats and National Security for the
Senate Armed Services Committee. Putin was “preparing for prolonged conflict” during which he still
intended to “achieve goals beyond the Donbas“ as he “most likely” also judged that Russia had “a
greater ability and willingness to endure challenges than his adversaries.” Putin was “probably counting on US and EU resolve to weaken,” Haines explained. In this context, she dampened hopes of a negotiated solution as long as both sides “believe they can continue to make progress militarily.” However, she warned, “Putin faces a mismatch between his ambitions and Russia’s current conventional
military capabilities.” Therefore, “the next few months could see us moving along a more unpredictable and potentially escalatory trajectory. At the very least, … the dichotomy will usher in a period of
more ad hoc decision-making in Russia.” Current trends increase “the likelihood that President Putin
will turn to more drastic means,” including “potentially escalatory military actions,” continued
Haines.
However, Haines interpreted Russia’s nuclear rhetoric as an attempt “to deter the United States and
the West from increasing lethal aid to Ukraine and to respond to public comments of the US and
NATO Allies that suggest expanded Western goals in the conflict. If Putin perceives the United States
is ignoring his threats, he may try to signal to Washington the heightened danger of its support to
Ukraine by authorizing another large nuclear exercise involving a major dispersal of mobile, intercontinental missiles, heavy bombers, strategic submarines,” she elaborated. But: Putin “would only authorize the use of nuclear weapons if he perceived an existential threat to the Russian state or regime,” she noted. “That could be the case in the event that he perceives that he is losing the war in
Ukraine and that NATO, in effect, is either intervening or about to intervene.., which would obviously
contribute to a perception that he is about to lose the war in Ukraine,” explained Haines. She also emphasized that “with tensions this high there’s always an enhanced potential for miscalculation, unintended escalation, which we hope our intelligence can help to mitigate