We, the Leaders of the Group of Seven (G7), are steadfast in our solidarity with Ukraine,
and reaffirm our unwavering commitment to support the government and people of
Ukraine in their courageous defence of their country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and in their fight for a peaceful, prosperous and democratic future. We welcome the
European Council’s decision to grant the status of candidate country to Ukraine and
Moldova. We will continue to provide financial, humanitarian, military and diplomatic
support and stand with Ukraine for as long as it takes. As we do so, we commit to
demonstrate global responsibility and solidarity through working to address the
international impacts of Russia’s aggression, especially on the most vulnerable.
Condemnation of Russia’s war: We remain appalled by and continue to condemn the
brutal, unprovoked, unjustifiable and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine by Russia
and aided by Belarus. We condemn and will not recognise Russia’s continued attempts to
re-draw borders by force. This devastating war has produced dramatic consequences far
beyond Europe. It constitutes a blatant violation of international law, in particular a grave
breach of the United Nations Charter. It seriously undermines the international rules-based
system that underpins global peace, prosperity, and security. We further condemn Russian
attempts to replace Ukrainian democratically elected officials with illegitimate ones. We
reiterate our demand that Russia put an end to this war of choice, and immediately,
unconditionally cease all hostilities and withdraw its troops and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders. We reiterate
our condemnation of Russia's unjustified use of nuclear rhetoric and signaling. Russia must
abide by its international commitments, including those which ban the use of chemical,
biological or nuclear weapons. We urge Russia to behave responsibly and exercise restraint,
and reiterate that any use of such weapons would be unacceptable and met with severe
consequences. In this regard we express serious concern after the announcement by Russia
that it could transfer missiles with nuclear capabilities to Belarus.
Supporting Ukrainian Efforts to End the War: We are committed to helping Ukraine to
uphold its sovereignty and territorial integrity, to defend itself, and to choose its own
future. It is up to Ukraine to decide on a future peace settlement, free from external
pressure or influence. We will continue to coordinate efforts to meet Ukraine’s urgent
requirements for military and defence equipment. We will also continue to coordinate to 
provide Ukraine with the material, training and logistic, intelligence, and economic support
to build up its armed forces.
Commitment to Ukraine’s Security and Resilience: With a view to a viable post-war peace
settlement, we are ready to reach arrangements together with interested countries and
institutions and Ukraine on sustained security commitments to help Ukraine defend itself,
secure its free and democratic future, and deter future Russian aggression. We stand ready
to further strengthen Ukraine’s resilience by expanding our cooperation in intelligence and
information sharing, information security, as well as maritime security. We will continue
supporting Ukraine in defending its networks against cyber incidents and expand our
cooperation in the fields of energy security, the safety and security of nuclear material and
facilities, environmental, and water use issues. We will continue to support Ukraine in
resisting threats to its democratic institutions and their common democratic values and
principles, including through support for free media as well as countering disinformation
and interference in democratic processes.
Humanitarian Assistance: Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, have caused immeasurable
human suffering and loss of life. As a consequence, we witness today the largest
displacement of civilians in Europe since the Second World War. As G7, we have provided
and pledged more than USD 2.8 billion in humanitarian assistance so far in 2022. We
underline our shared commitment to continue to provide substantial and ongoing
humanitarian support to those affected by Russia’s war, in particular to protect the rights
of women and children.
Supporting Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees: We reaffirm our resolve to protect
and support forcibly displaced persons and refugees, and, to provide relief to host
countries. We applaud the solidarity and efforts of all countries that support Ukraine by
hosting refugees fleeing combat zones. We will enhance our support through the provision
of short- and medium-term assistance, as well as strengthening access to a range of
support services for those displaced and affected both in Ukraine as well as in other host
countries. To this end, we endorse the Moldova Support Platform. We will seek to provide
safe passage for refugees, including by further streamlining immigration procedures and
visa requirements and strengthening efforts to prevent and respond to the heightened risk
of human trafficking among the refugee population, who are disproportionately women
and children. We aim to further facilitate the integration of refugees from Ukraine into our
labour markets, to protect and ensure their labour rights, and to provide access to adequate
social protection and education for as long as necessary.
Compliance with International Humanitarian Law: We call on Russia to comply with its
obligations under international humanitarian law. We urge Russia to immediately provide 
for safe, rapid, and unimpeded humanitarian access and make safe passages work, enabling
humanitarian aid to be delivered to besieged cities and civilians to reach safety towards a
destination of their choice. Furthermore, we demand that Russia immediately allow the
safe return of Ukrainian nationals taken often with force to Russia without their consent.
We also underline the need to ensure protection for neutral and impartial humanitarian
organisations and their aid workers operating in Ukraine. Russia and its proxies must
respect international humanitarian law, including the rights and protections afforded to
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions. We condemn the sham “trials” resulting
in application of the death sentence to members of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Accountability for War Crimes: There can be no impunity for war crimes and other
atrocities. We condemn in the strongest terms ongoing attacks on civilians and noncombatants, the systematic targeting of critical infrastructure, schools and kindergartens,
healthcare personnel and facilities, as well as conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence in Ukraine. We further condemn the deliberate targeting of Ukrainian cultural sites
and regard the destruction of Ukrainian heritage by Russian forces – and suppression of
the Ukrainian language and media in areas illegally occupied by Russia – as an attempt to
wipe out Ukraine’s history and cultural identity. We welcome and support the ongoing
work to investigate war crimes and other atrocity crimes, including by the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), the independent international commission of
inquiry mandated by the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) and the work of
the Expert Missions under the Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE) as well as the national investigations by the Office of the
Prosecutor General of Ukraine. We welcome efforts to increase cooperation between all
investigations taking place in Ukraine and will intensify our police and judicial cooperation
with Ukraine as well as with relevant organisations. We welcome national investigative and
jurisdiction efforts in line with the principle of universal jurisdiction where consistent with
domestic law. The immediate perpetrators of war crimes and other atrocity crimes, as well
as officials and military leaders responsible for their commission, must be held to account
in accordance with international law.
Safe Haven for Dissidents Fleeing Russia’s Political Repression: We are concerned by the
fact that Russia's brutal war of aggression against Ukraine is accompanied by ever stronger
internal repression within Russia, especially against independent journalists, human rights
activists and opposition figures, as well as ordinary citizens. We will make available
protection to Russians who are persecuted by the Russian regime, as consistent with our
national laws and requirements.
Increasing Food Security: Russia bears enormous responsibility for rising threats to global
food security as a result of the conflict. Russia’s unprovoked assault on Ukraine – marked
by bombing, blockades, and theft – has severely prevented Ukraine from exporting its
agricultural products and is hampering its production capacity, leading to steep price rises
and increasing global food insecurity for millions, especially those most vulnerable, such as
women and children. We urgently call on Russia to cease, without condition, its attacks on
agricultural and transport infrastructure and enable free passage of agricultural shipping
from Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea. We are united and determined to strongly support
Ukraine in producing and exporting grain, oil, and other agricultural products and we will
foster coordinated initiatives that promote global food security and address the causes of
the evolving a global food crisis.
Sanctions: We remain steadfast in our commitment to our unprecedented coordinated
sanctions measures in response to Russia’s war of aggression, the impacts of which will
compound over time. We are committed to sustaining and intensifying international
economic and political pressure on President Putin’s regime and its enablers in Belarus,
depriving Russia of the economic means to persist in its war of aggression against Ukraine,
and we will continue our targeted use of coordinated sanctions for as long as necessary,
acting in unison at every stage. Our use of sanctions is in defence of the rules-based
international order that Russia has so egregiously violated. To this end, we endorse the
annex on Supporting Ukraine Through Responsible Sanctions Against Russia.
In order to further intensify our economic measures against Russia, we collectively commit
to taking the following measures in the days and weeks ahead, consistent with our
respective legal authorities and processes. We will continue to explore new ways to isolate
Russia from participating in the global market and crack down on evasion. We are
determined to reduce Russia’s revenues, including from gold. We will also continue to
target evasion and backfilling activities. We will further reduce Russia’s export revenues by
taking appropriate steps to further reduce dependency on Russian energy, as articulated in
the Energy section of our Communique. We will continue to coordinate on tariff measures
on imports from Russia and explore possible pathways in line with our respective legislation
to use the revenues to assist Ukraine where applicable. We will align and expand targeted
sanctions to further restrict Russia’s access to key industrial inputs, services, and
technologies produced by our economies, particularly those supporting Russia’s armament
industrial base and technology sector. Finally, we will increase the costs of Russia’s war on
Ukraine by imposing targeted sanctions on those responsible for war crimes, exercising
illegitimate authority in Ukraine, and those standing behind Russia’s engagement in efforts
to increase global food insecurity by stealing and exporting Ukrainian grain or otherwise
profit illegitimately from the war.
As we impose severe costs on Russia and those who are complicit in its aggression, we will
continue to assist the global economy and take action to help mitigate spillover effects,
especially relating to humanitarian and other basic needs, and vulnerable populations. We
will continue to ensure that in taking further measures, we are not targeting food and allow 
for the free flow of agricultural products and make every effort to minimise potential
negative impacts and spillovers on third countries, in particular low- and middle-income
countries. We are united in our commitment to fully implement and enforce these
measures and remain vigilant against sanctions evasion and backfilling. Recalling the
resolutions of the UN General Assembly on 2nd and 24th March 2022, we call on all
countries around the world to stand with us in defending the principles of the UN Charter,
and to join us by taking similar actions.
Financial and Economic Support: As of today we are ready to grant, or have pledged and
provided up to USD 29.5 billion of budget support in 2022 to help Ukraine close its
financing gap and continue ensuring the delivery of basic services to the Ukrainian people.
Overall, this support is urgently needed and comes on top of the economic support
provided since 2014 until 2021, which exceeds USD 60 billion. We welcome and support
ongoing work across international financial institutions (IFIs) on further substantial
financing to Ukraine, notably the financial support from the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, including the Bank’s multi-donor financing vehicles for
Ukraine and the establishment of the Fund’s Multi-Donor Administered Account for
Ukraine. We look forward to additional planned support to Ukrainian state-owned
enterprises and the private sector through the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD) and the International Finance Corporation which amounts to USD
3.5 billion. We will support the EBRD, including through providing specific support to
critical infrastructure, notably to guarantee EBRD loans to gas, power, and transportation
companies. Across all our support, we are urgently working on accelerating disbursements
of our financial commitments to Ukraine. Furthermore, we commit to assisting Ukraine in
maximising its export potential. We task Finance Ministers to continue to work with IFIs
and with Ukraine to assess and address its financing needs. We task G7 Trade Ministers to
discuss concrete proposals to support Ukraine’s recovery efforts through trade, including
for example suspending tariffs on Ukrainian exports.
Reconstruction: We recognise the devastating destruction of infrastructure, including
basic social and public infrastructure, cities, industry, and agricultural facilities in Ukraine,
and the urgent need for immediate reconstruction of critical infrastructure. We stand ready
to support an international reconstruction plan, drawn up and implemented by Ukraine in
close coordination with bilateral and multilateral partners and organisations in support of
a sustainable, resilient, inclusive, and green economic recovery which enhances strong
democratic institutions, rule of law, and anti-corruption measures. To this end, we
welcome the Presidency’s initiative to convene with Ukraine an international high-level
experts conference, to make progress on a comprehensive reconstruction plan. We support
the World Bank Group’s support package to Ukraine and the EBRD’s Resilience Package,
as well as ongoing work by the European Union and its Member States, considering a 
Ukraine reconstruction platform and a solidarity fund. Communities, civil society
organisations, including women’s rights organisations, and the private sector should be
active participants in planning Ukraine’s future. The recovery and reconstruction plan
should build local resilience and social cohesion by ensuring that all members of society,
particularly those most affected by the war, equally benefit. We are strongly committed to
supporting Ukrainian reconstruction and will step up our respective efforts. We will also
explore other viable options to support Ukraine’s humanitarian needs, early recovery, and
reconstruction, including using frozen Russian assets consistent with our national laws. We
call on all partners to join our efforts, and engage with us to help Ukraine to rebuild its
future. 