Vladimir Putin: Alexander Grigoryevich, good afternoon!

Thanks for coming.

Our meeting today is taking place on a significant day - on the day of the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between our countries. This is not an ordinary day, so we agreed to see you, and the volume of our interaction is such that it requires constant checking of clocks, which is what we are doing.

I would like to note once again that last year the trade turnover increased by more than a third, amounting to more than $38 billion, and this increase continues in the first four months of this year.

A. Lukashenko : 110 percent.

Vladimir Putin: Well, so, apparently, we are on the right track.

Russia has invested four billion dollars in the economy of Belarus in previous years - these are our direct investments. There are also investments from Belarusian enterprises. We have good big joint projects, and there are a lot of current issues in this area.

I would like to inform you about the progress and results of the discussion with colleagues within the framework of the BRICS association. Many of the speakers expressed concerns about disruptions in food supplies, rising global food prices and fertilizers.

Bearing in mind that Russia and Belarus are the largest suppliers of fertilizers to the world market, I would like to talk to you about this as well, in terms of meeting the needs of the world market and our regular customers.

We have, I think, 15 percent of world trade and 25 percent for some types of fertilizers – this is a very significant volume on world markets. The lack of fertilizer, of course, reduces the prospects for next year's harvest. All this is very sad.

Nevertheless, you and I agreed to do everything that depends on us, to take all the actions that depend on us in order – I repeat once again – to meet the demands of our consumers, our clients.

There are, of course, problems associated with ensuring security in the region and in the world as a whole. There are many questions here. I will brief you on all these issues in relation to the events in the Donbass.

And of course, issues related to the construction of the Union State remain in our field of vision. Here we have practically everything agreed between the relevant departments, the only question is the implementation of all the goals set.

In general, we have a rather large, voluminous list of issues that we must discuss today.

A. Lukashenko: Vladimir Vladimirovich, I always thank you for the fact that as a historian, you know, I managed to discover some things for myself. You allowed me to touch this wonderful place, I visited Bronka, where we plan to build a Belarusian port. Thank you for your support, you approved that construction project.

I looked, I was very pleased to see what Kronstadt is, to face face to face, the dam, the construction of which was completed with your great assistance, in your period. Well, look at other places, in general, see from the water what Peter is. For me it was very important and useful from the point of view of building a port economy.

We are satisfied with the place that is designated and supported by you, the place is good. Therefore, we are already slowly starting to ship mineral fertilizers there. I think that there will be the most powerful port. We may not even have enough. But, as we agreed, we will see if we need to expand.

I planned to discuss economic issues with you today - you touched on them. I would ask you to talk in more detail about defense issues: this is very important for us now, critically important in connection with what is happening in the West, as well as security issues.

If we talk about the economy, our traditional topic is import substitution. We have proposed 15 major projects. The Russian side approved them, you supported us in terms of co-financing these projects. If everything goes as planned, we will soon start producing import-substituting products. That is, those companies of unfriendly countries that supplied us, to Russia and Belarus, products, we will be able to produce our own during this and next year. There are 15 such large projects.

Logistics: I have already mentioned the port of Bronka, I looked at it today.

I want to talk to you about the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, where we are observers. Perhaps we will consult, you will support, increase, expand our status. A lot of time has already passed. I think we will not be superfluous there.

Let's discuss the problem of the Forum of Regions.

Vladimir Putin: July 1.

Alexander Lukashenko: Yes, I think that we will take part in it, as usual, by videoconference. This forum is held by parliamentarians, the upper houses of parliaments. Here and in Russia, they are well organized and will hold a very good forum in Grodno.

I have a number of private questions that I want to discuss with you: in the field of the economy, as well as questions relating to defense.

Vladimir Vladimirovich, we are very annoyed by the situation and the policy pursued by our neighbors. You, in general, know that this is the leadership of Poland and the leadership of Lithuania. The policy of confrontation. And you have enough of them, especially in Ukraine: recently, most of the mercenaries, as we notice, are from Poland. I don’t understand why they need it, confrontation, but it’s clear that they are standing behind their backs, pushing and so on. But the policy is disgusting, the behavior is aggressive.

The same is true for Lithuania. Recently, there has been a growing flow of information about their plan to stop transit from Russia through Belarus to Kaliningrad, to isolate Kaliningrad. Listen, this is akin to declaring some kind of war already, such things are unacceptable in modern conditions.

We are very concerned about the issues of training flights of aircraft of the United States of America and NATO, which are trained to carry nuclear warheads and nuclear charges. It makes us very stressed.

Therefore, I ask you to consider the question of a mirror answer to these things, without busting. They are training to carry nuclear warheads, can you at least help us to adapt our aircraft that we have, Su-35, I think, that can carry nuclear warheads. I’m not talking about what we will transport tomorrow or you will transport nuclear weapons there, but we can’t joke, we remember 1941, when we were lulled to sleep: everything will be fine, everything is quiet, no one will attack - and then we were not ready for this . Therefore, this is a very serious situation for us, and this is not the first time I have put this question before you. I know what you considered in the Ministry of Defense.

I would like to hear how things develop here. I make no secret, I am raising the question that we should be ready for anything, even for the use of the most serious weapons, in order to defend our Fatherland from Brest to Vladivostok. This is our immediate responsibility. And especially these trainings, you also know about them, American flights using NATO partners. If they train, then they probably think something, or why train?

In general, we must discuss a range of defense and security issues with you today so that our people understand that they, Russians and Belarusians, are under serious protection.

Vladimir Putin: Alexander Grigorievich, we will now discuss the entire range of issues related to the development of infrastructure, trade, and the implementation of major projects.

By the way, this morning I discussed with the leadership of the Government within the framework of credit resources, which we talked about, in order to create financial opportunities for Belarusian enterprises and start producing import-substituting products - not only import-substituting, but also creating our own engineering studies, for in order to reach a higher level of what we, Russia and Belarus, need. The government agrees that part of these resources should be and can be used by Belarusian enterprises in order to be able to produce products for third-country markets as well. Ultimately, Russia will also be interested in this, bearing in mind the level of our cooperation.

As for security issues, yes, indeed, in Europe, the Americans have 200 nuclear tactical ammunition, mostly atomic bombs, 200 in six European countries - members of the North Atlantic bloc of NATO. For their possible use, 257 aircraft have been prepared - and not only American, but also these countries I have mentioned.

A. Lukashenko: Outside the US.

Vladimir Putin: Outside the US, in Europe.

A. Lukashenko: There is not a single base like this in Russia.

Vladimir Putin: Not in Russia.

You said that it would be possible to answer mirrored. It is possible, but you and I, even a mirror image, probably should not answer, there is no need.

But I completely agree with you that we are obliged to take care of the unconditional provision of our security, the security of the Union State, and perhaps other CSTO countries.

Therefore, I propose the following: the Belarusian army is armed with a fairly large group of Su-25 aircraft, they could be re-equipped accordingly.

A. Lukashenko: 25 planes?

Vladimir Putin: Yes, Su-25. They could be upgraded. True, this modernization should be carried out at aircraft factories in Russia, but we will agree with you on how to do this. And accordingly, start training the flight crew. This is the first.

And second. As you and I agreed, you raised the issue, we have made a decision: within the next few months we will transfer to Belarus the Iskander-M tactical missile systems, which, as you know, can use both ballistic and cruise missiles , both in conventional and nuclear versions.

I propose that the ministries of defense and the chiefs of the general staff should be instructed to work out all the details related to this joint work.

A. Lukashenko: Yes, I absolutely agree.

Vladimir Putin: Agreed.

As for economic issues, I would still propose to return to the topic that is now the most relevant - the food topic and the topic of supplying fertilizers to world markets.

We are in close contact with the relevant relevant UN agencies. I would also like to inform you how this work is developing.

A. Lukashenko: But we have no problems with deliveries of either grain or fertilizers to the market. You don't have to put it on us.

Vladimir Putin: This is true. This is what I wanted to talk about, because many of our partners are asking for more deliveries. We just need to talk about the details related to logistics.

And last year Russia supplied more than 40 million tons of grain to world markets. This agricultural year - until next summer - we will be ready to deliver, probably, more than 50 million tons. I know that Belarus is also increasing production, and under your leadership, Belarusian agriculture is developing very confidently and successfully.

As for fertilizers, here we need, of course, to join forces in order to help our traditional partners get the necessary…

A. Lukashenko: We produce half of the fertilizers together with Russia, half! These are huge volumes.

Vladimir Putin: Production of some [species] is somewhere around 15 percent, and 25 percent in trade.

<…>