Strategic Deterrence Exercise
Under the leadership of Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces Vladimir Putin, a planned exercise of the strategic deterrence forces was held, during which ballistic and cruise missiles were launched.

February 19, 202214:10Moscow, Kremlin
Vladimir Putin, together with President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko, watched the exercise of the strategic deterrence forces from the Kremlin's situational center.
1 of 4
Vladimir Putin, together with President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko, watched the exercise of the strategic deterrence forces from the Kremlin's situational center.
The head of state watched the exercise from the situational center of the Kremlin together with President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko.

Forces and means of the Aerospace Forces, the Southern Military District, the Strategic Missile Forces, the Northern and Black Sea Fleets were involved in the exercise.

Aerospace Forces successfully launched Kinzhal hypersonic aeroballistic missiles.

Ships and submarines of the Northern and Black Sea Fleets launched Kalibr cruise missiles and Zirkon hypersonic missiles at sea and ground targets.

In the Astrakhan region, at the Kapustin Yar training ground, a practical launch of the Iskander ground-based cruise missile was carried out.

From the position area of the Plesetsk state test cosmodrome, the Yars intercontinental ballistic missile was launched at the Kura test site on the Kamchatka Peninsula.

Air-launched cruise missiles fired from Tu-95MS long-range strategic missile carriers hit targets at the Pemboi and Kura ranges.

From the waters of the Barents Sea, the strategic nuclear submarine Karelia of the Northern Fleet launched the Sineva ballistic missile at the Kura range.

The exercise of the strategic deterrence forces was planned earlier, during which the readiness of military command and control bodies, combat crews of launch, crews of warships and strategic missile carriers to perform the assigned tasks, as well as the reliability of weapons of strategic nuclear and non-nuclear forces, was checked.

The tasks envisaged during the exercise of the strategic deterrence forces were completed in full, all missiles hit the designated targets, confirming the specified characteristics.