Hello everyone, good morning, it's Friday, May 6, 2022. If you are one of those who are counting the days while waiting for the official announcement of Emmanuel Macron's new government, know that you can console yourself by watching the inauguration of the president this Saturday. The opportunity may be to scrutinize the faces of the ministers, to distinguish those who have the head to the task and those who are already elsewhere.

RENÉ, TOP START
UNITY IS STRENGTH. It is a show of unity offered by the three leaders of the presidential majority gathered yesterday in front of the press gathered at LREM HQ, sorry Renaissance. After days and even a few nights of negotiations, Edouard Philippe, Richard Ferrand and François Bayrou agreed yesterday on the creation of a “confederation” to embark on the battle for the legislative elections and articulate the future presidential majority. A first salvo of 187 candidates in total were invested yesterday, and a second is scheduled for Saturday.

We promise, we love each other. The majo tenors were full of praise for each other, commenting at length on the “good atmosphere” of the discussions. History especially to put an end to the rumors of tensions and outbursts of anger relayed lately by the press. Bayrou even said that he had never encountered a “better climate” during negotiations (as this photo taken by AFP very well illustrates).

Alliance, single party, association… It will ultimately be a confederation that will bring together Horizons, the Modem and La République en Marche, thus becoming “Together! – Presidential Majority”, under the presidency of Ferrand and the vice-presidency of Philippe and Bayrou. The idea of a large single party, sketched out by Emmanuel Macron on the evening of the first round of the presidential election, fizzled out. Bonus point for Bayrou and Philippe, the different parties of the conf 'will be able to create their own group in the National Assembly.

**A message from Bayer: When harnessed correctly, data and analytics hold great potential in healthcare. What if artificial intelligence could significantly advance clinical research? Learn more about the potential of using digital data in healthcare.**

As a reminder. Philippe resisted with all his might the creation of a large majo party that would engulf his own Horizons party created last October. This week, we also told you about his tough negotiations with the Mr. election of Macronie. The president's supporters criticized the former prime minister for eyeing too many constituencies, not hiding his own ambitions for 2027 well enough. Horizons personalities were sometimes better placed to win the legislative battle.

No mercy for newbies. In the end, it would seem that Philippe gave in on this point. It carries 58 constituencies, including a part concerning outgoing deputies already labeled Horizons. But the principle of “renewal of outgoing people” is part of the agreement, according to Gilles Boyer, Philippe’s closest support, who says he is “disappointed at not having obtained more”, having defended applications of “very good quality”. The Horizons candidates will therefore have to fight to conquer new territories.

The force of the war. It is of course the money, and there everyone sees the glass half full. The invested candidates will campaign on the banner of Ensemble! which means that the public funding obtained will be donated to Together! and not to the different parties of the majo. "It's very solid," rejoices an LREM executive, unlike 2017 when each associated party had its own funding association. The parties will be linked to each other by funding, which will go through the confederation, making it difficult for any desire for independence in the medium term.

But, but, but. The money collected by Together! will be “automatically” donated to the various parties of the confederation, a device “which cannot be called into question” according to a majority adviser. Far from merging with LREM, Horizons would therefore keep all “its autonomy”, according to Boyer.

The king is dead, long live the king. Yesterday's conference was also an opportunity to unveil the change of name of the presidential party, which therefore becomes Renaissance. This name was also that of the list presented by the presidential majority to the Europeans of 2019. Unlike LREM, often accused of being "an empty shell", the Renaissance list is seen as "a success story", an alliance of more various, and the name has become a mark appreciated by activists, according to the LREM framework cited above.

Ministers and circos. In the first list of majority nominations, there are ten ministers: Olivier Dussopt (2nd district of Ardèche), Jean-Michel Blanquer (4th of Loiret), Brigitte Klinkert (1st of Haut-Rhin), Gérald Darmanin (10th of North), Laurent Pietraszewski (11th of North), Amélie de Montchalin (6th from Essonne), Clément Beaune (7th from Paris), Gabriel Attal (10th from Hauts-de-Seine), Emmanuelle Wargon (8th from Val-de-Marne), Elisabeth Borne (6th from Calvados). And a former minister, Manuel Valls (5th of the French abroad). On the other hand, Bruno Le Maire and Eric Dupond-Moretti announced yesterday that they would not be candidates.

LR keeps his distance. According to information from Figaro, only “five to seven” outgoing LR deputies will run with the presidential majority. We are far from the thirty elected LR Macron-compatibles concerned by the negotiations of the last few weeks. Damien Abad, the leader of LR deputies, yet at the center of speculation this week, would not be part of it.

BIG UNPACKING AT PS
NUPES IN ORBIT. It was after discussions of rare violence that the members of the National Council of the Socialist Party voted in favor of the union agreement with La France Insoumise, EELV and the PCF yesterday. Despite the rebellion that had been mounting for several days, a large majority of the 300 council members (62%) approved NUPES in a show of hands.

No but no. But the vote was the occasion for an unpacking of emotions and criticism against the architects of the agreement. According to our colleague from LCI on the spot, the former deputy Patrick Mennucci challenged the first secretary of the PS Olivier Faure by throwing to him: “You told me to leave the PS. There will be plenty of other first secretaries before I leave the PS”. Regional councilor François Kalfon accused management of dismissing local heavyweights who, like the president of the Occitanie region Carole Delga, support dissidents. “We are going to lose them all. We lost in advance. None of our five regional presidents support this agreement,” he said.

Manhandled. Defending his strategy before the vote, Olivier Faure spoke of a PS in 1972 which did not show as much "gazelle modesty" when it allied with an "ultra-dominant" Communist party, "in direct line with the Kremlin" and ally of Nasser in Egypt. In view of past statements by Jean-Luc Mélenchon on Russia and Vladimir Poutine, it is not certain that this historical reminder does not reassure everyone. His speech was interrupted by an activist.

Cold shower. Faure did not spare the sensitivities of elected officials during his speech, recalling that Anne Hidalgo only exceeded 3% in the first round of the presidential election in 12 constituencies despite a “courageous and determined” campaign. And he warned against threats from dissident candidates, arguing that territorial anchoring plays a lot less role during the legislative elections held in the wake of the presidential election. Faure described the vote as a "moment of clarification", the opportunity to dispel the "doubt for five years" maintained by the presence of former socialists in Macron's government and to clearly fit into "the political space of the LEFT".

Okay boomers. For those who would be surprised to see such a majority vote in favor of the agreement despite strong criticism in the press, a PS executive saw it as a partly “generational” conflict in the PS, recalling that Stéphane Le Foll, Bernard Cazeneuve , François Hollande and Julien Dray are “no longer active” in party bodies. "We want to turn the page on Holland's five-year term, and look to the future," he said. The new left will meet on Saturday for the official launch of the Nupes in Aubervilliers.


AT THE PALACE
THE UNDERSIDE OF THE INVESTITURE. We now know the details of Emmanuel Macron's second investiture ceremony, which will take place on Saturday at the Elysée. Certain elements of the program are immutable: the proclamation of the results, the presentation of the collar of Grand Master of the Legion of Honor, the 21 cannon shots from the Invalides and the review of the troops. Nevertheless, “each president can have at heart to mark the ceremony in a singular way”, explains the Elysée to us. This can be done in particular through the speech delivered by the president, in particular to the presidents of the Senate and the National Assembly.

Guest list. Invitations were sent Wednesday evening. The relatives of the president as well as 450 officials were invited. Among them, Nicolas Sarkozy, François Hollande (who has already confirmed his arrival), Edouard Philippe. Will be present, as at each investiture, representatives of all political forces, unions, employers' and religious organizations as well as French institutions.

Civil society and military. Emmanuel Macron wished the presence of personalities from sectors of activity which marked the first five-year term, and which will probably mark the second: health personnel, sportsmen, elected officials, members of civil society. The president chose the soldiers he wanted to distinguish by inviting them to the review of the troops. Among them, special forces engaged in the Sahel, elements of the space command, forces linked to nuclear deterrence and elements of the parachute commando which participated in the evacuation of Kabul in 2021.

SEEN FROM BRUSSELS
THE PRUDENT COMMISSION ON THE ‘CRUSADE’ OF DENORMANDY. It is a battle led by Paris and which promises to be strewn with pitfalls: imposing on third countries the same production standards as those of the EU in trade agreements with them could expose Brussels to trade reprisals and legal proceedings before the World Trade Organisation, explains the draft version of a long-awaited report from the Commission which is due to be presented to EU agriculture ministers in June and which our colleagues in Brussels have had access to. Full details are in our Morning Agri newsletter (for POLITICO Pro subscribers).

As a reminder, the dossier is an important priority for the French Presidency of the Council of the EU. The Minister of Agriculture Julien Denormandie himself called it a “real crusade”.

TECH 28. POLITICO's annual ranking recognizes 28 influential personalities in European tech. You can suggest personalities here, and register for the event here.

**Margrethe Vestager, European Executive Vice President, will be one of our speakers at POLITICO Live's Competitive Europe Summit. Confirm your presence today to discuss competitiveness in Europe. It's this way.**

ALSO ON THE AGENDA
Sophie Cluzel is going to Pierrefeu-du-Var (83) as part of the inauguration of the autism residential unit of the Specialized Reception Center "Les Acacias".

Please note: deadline for registration on the electoral lists at the town hall.

Saturday, Emmanuel Macron's investiture ceremony for his second term from 11 a.m. at the Elysée. The new popular, ecological and social union (NUPES) holds its investiture convention from 2:30 p.m. at the docks of Paris (Aubervilliers). Speech by Jean-Luc Mélenchon at 4.30 p.m. LR National Council and official launch of their electoral campaign for the legislative elections, behind closed doors, alongside the centrists and the UDI (2 p.m.), followed by a press conference by Christian Jacob (4 p.m.). Reconquête organizes a training day for its candidates (Salle Wagram, Paris).

Sunday, Emmanuel Macron presides over the ceremony commemorating the 77th anniversary of the victory of May 8, 1945, from 11 a.m., in the presence of Jean Castex, Florence Parly and Geneviève Darrieussecq. The president meditates in front of the statue of General De Gaulle (place Clémenceau), then goes up the Champs Elysées with the Republican Guard. Once at the Place de l'Etoile, he meditates at the tomb of the unknown soldier.