Biden’s controversial remarks did not result in an escalation of Russian nuclear rhetoric. On March
28, Kremlin spokesperson Peskov did emphasize that Biden’s statements about Putin were “alarming,” a “personal insult” and “unacceptable.” “It’s not for the United States’ president to decide who is
going to be and who is the president of Russia, it is the people of Russia who decide it during elections,” he explained. However, in the same interview Peskov also clarified and revised previous nuclear threats, citing Russian doctrine. “Any outcome” of Russia’s operation in Ukraine “of course, is
not a reason for usage of a nuclear weapon,” he said. Russia, he said, had a security concept that “very
clearly states that only when there is a threat for the existence of the state in our country, we can use
and we will actually use nuclear weapons to eliminate the threat for the existence of our country.”
“Let’s keep these two things separate ... the existence of the state and the special military operation in
Ukraine,” Peskov said. “They have nothing to do with each other.”
Nevertheless, the Kremlin spokesman also recalled “the initial statement of [Putin] … when he ordered the operation on the 24th February,” in which he warned various states “not to interfere in affairs between Ukraine and Russia during this operation.” “Everyone understands what he meant [by
that],” Peskov declared. When asked if that meant Putin would use nuclear weapons if a third country
intervened in Ukraine, he said, “I don’t think so,” although Putin had made it clear that no one should
interfere. If anyone did, Peskov explained, Russia had “all the possibilities to prevent that and punish all those who are going to interfere.” However, “no one is thinking about using, not even about the
idea of using a nuclear weapon.”
Asked about a scenario in which Russia might send troops to or bomb a NATO country, Peskov remained cautious: “If it’s not a reciprocal act, so if they don’t make us do that, we cannot think about
that and we do not want to think about that.”