Russian officials nonetheless continued to march back Putin’s nuclear narratives. On May 5, Russian
Ambassador to the US Anatoly Antonov explained that nuclear weapons could only “be used in response to the use of WMD against Russia and its allies, or in the event of aggression against our country, when the very existence of the state is jeopardized.” The decision to raise the alert level of Russia’s deterrent forces had been “misinterpreted” by the West. As had been explained by Shoigu, the
alert had been “only about the work shifts of strategic forces commands which began to perform combat duties with reinforced personnel.” This meant that Russia had “increased its vigilance against the
backdrop of extremely confrontational statements by Western countries, including NATO member
states that possess nuclear weapons,” clarified Antonov. He concluded: Russia did not “threaten the
United States and its European allies, but, on the contrary, is making every effort to prevent the escalation of the Ukrainian crisis. … We are compelled to warn of the emerging risks associated with the
intervention of NATO states into the Russian special military operation.”
In contrast, the “current generation of NATO politicians clearly does not take the nuclear threat seriously,” Antonov complained, pointing at what he saw as “a flurry of blatant misrepresentation of Russian officials’ statements on our country’s nuclear policy.” Moreover, he reiterated claims that Ukraine had intended to obtain nuclear weapons and had a biological weapons program, while criticizing Poland’s openness to host US nuclear weapons.
Nevertheless, Antonov also highlighted Russia’s interest in reaching “agreements that will guarantee
that a catastrophic confrontation will not be unleashed,” pointing to Moscow’s efforts to restate that
there could be no winners in a nuclear war with Biden and the other P5 states. Further, he stressed
the importance of the New START agreement as a “universally recognized gold standard in the sphere
of maintaining strategic stability and transparency between the major nuclear powers,” claiming that
“Russia has repeatedly drawn the attention of the United States that it is important to continue the
joint work on an agreement that could replace New START and accommodate new realities of international security and development of military technologies.”2