Meanwhile, Russian representatives rejected these accusations. Moscow “consistently follows” the
NPT’s “letter and spirit,” starting “from the premise that there can be no winners in a nuclear war and
it must never be unleashed,” Putin declared on August 1.
445
In its prepared statement from August 2, Russia argued that the fact that “the international security
and strategic stability situation has been deteriorating rapidly” was not its fault. Moscow had been
and remained committed to “freeing the world from the threat posed by WMDs.” Russia had been
committed to security and stability, but these “positive achievements” had been “devalued” by the “US
policy of ignoring Russia’s red lines in the field of security.” Nuclear powers had to “behave with restraint and responsibility” and Moscow was “strongly convinced that a nuclear war cannot be won
and must never be fought.” Hence, it would not deploy INF systems where the United States refrained
from doing so. Also, it had “significantly reduced the role of nuclear weapons in its defense policy,
which is purely defensive in nature and is aimed at protecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.” Regarding Ukraine, Russia wanted to “strongly reject all allegations.” The Ukrainian
“regime” had come to power “as a result of a coup” and persecuted the Russian-speaking population.
For eight years, “Ukrainian nationalists were killing civilians on this territory with near impunity and
preparing a large-scale military invasion of the republics that, in fact, broke away from Ukraine.”446
Subsequently, the Russian delegation also took the floor in a right of reply to talk about the nuclear
dimension of the Ukraine crisis. First, Moscow stated that it was fulfilling its obligations with the Budapest Memorandum, including “a commitment not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons.” This
was “fully implemented with respect to Ukraine, including in recent months.” Second, the Russian delegation underlined the defensive nature of Russia’s nuclear doctrine. A nuclear reaction would occur
“solely as a response to aggression involving weapons of mass destruction” or when a conventional
attack threatened “the very existence of the state.” But: “None of these two hypothetical scenarios is
relevant to the situation in Ukraine.” Third, the Russians noted that their warning was related to a
conflict with NATO potentially leading to nuclear exchanges. “Any military confrontation between nuclear rivals must be prevented, since it is fraught with the risk of escalation to the nuclear level,” the
argument went. A NATO intervention in Ukraine “would be able to trigger one of the two emergency
scenarios described in our doctrine. We obviously stand for preventing this, but if Western countries
try to test our resolve, Russia will not back down. And this is not the language of threats at all, but a
statement of what is possible – such is the logic of deterrence.”447
Media reports from August 2 noted that Russian diplomat Alexander Trofimov rejected “utterly unfounded, detached from reality and unacceptable speculations that Russia allegedly threatens to use
nuclear weapons, particularly in Ukraine.” However, Moscow could decide to use its nuclear arsenal
in response to “direct aggression” by NATO countries. Yet, Russia would only use nuclear weapons in
response to weapons of mass destruction or a conventional weapons attack that threatened the existence of the Russian state. “None of these two hypothetical scenarios is relevant to the situation in
Ukraine,” the Russian delegate said. However, he accused NATO countries of a “fierce hybrid confrontation” against Russia that now “dangerously balances on the edge of open military clash.” Such a
clash would “be able to trigger one of the two emergency scenarios described in our doctrine,” Trofimov said. “We obviously stand for preventing this, but if Western countries try to test our resolve,
Russia will not back down.”