De-escalation also appeared to be on Russian minds. In an interview on August 22, Russian Deputy
Foreign Minister Sergey Ryabkov confirmed a restrictive approach to any potential use of nuclear
weapons. Referring back to Lavrov’ statement from April 25 that the nuclear risks were real but
should not be “inflated,” he noted that “one of the most important tasks … is to maintain adherence by
all the nuclear five states to the postulate of the inadmissibility of any war between countries possessing nuclear weapons.” In this context he condemned the NATO countries’ “destructive course” to
“ignore” Russian “red lines” and “get involved in a confrontation with Russia in Ukraine, balancing on
the brink of direct armed conflict.” This was “extremely risky” and “fraught with further escalation,
up to a military clash of nuclear powers with dire consequences,” he explained. “This must be prevented.” He then also referred to Russian doctrine, which clearly laid down that “Russia hypothetically allows a nuclear response only in response to aggression using WMD against us or our allies, or
aggression using conventional weapons, when the very existence of the state is threatened.” Hence: The key word in both scenarios is aggression,” meaning that “the use of nuclear weapons by Russia is
possible only in response to an attack - for self-defense in emergency circumstances,” he explained. “There is no place for conjectures or fantasies here.”489
Finally, Ryabkov added, Moscow remained “open in principle to serious, pragmatic and result-oriented interaction aimed at reducing tensions and risks, preventing a dangerous escalation and arms
race, and strengthening strategic stability, including through arms control.” The START Treaty “ideally should be replaced by a new agreement or agreements.” However, he blamed the United States
on the lack of progress in this regard. The resumption of bilateral strategic talks between Moscow
<<<<<<< HEAD
and Washington was unlikely due to the latter’s “deliberately destructive course