The same day, April 29, Lavrov qualified his earlier statements about the risks of nuclear war. His
words had been taken out of context. In fact, he had stressed that Russia had been “champions of
making pledges by all nuclear countries never to start a nuclear war” and had repeatedly insisted on
such a declaration with other nuclear powers. Lavrov meant the declarations by Russia and the
United States, as well as by the P5 states, that a nuclear war could not be won, which he claimed had
grown out of Moscow’s initiative. Referring to a statement by Polish Prime Minister Mateusz
Morawiecki that Warsaw would “welcome” a deployment of US nuclear weapons to Poland, Lavrov
declared that it was Western states, like Poland and Ukraine, that were using dangerous nuclear rhetoric. We never were playing with such dangerous [nuclear rhetoric]. ... We should all insist on the
statements made by the P5, never ever there could be a nuclear war. But to make sure that this
is the case, the West must discipline speakers like our Ukrainian and Polish colleagues who see
no danger in playing with such very, very risky words.
In addition, Lavrov clarified that Russia did not see itself at war with NATO, but that Western arms
deliveries were a legitimate military target for Russian forces once they reached Ukrainian territory.
We do not see ourselves at war with NATO because this is exactly another step … to increase the
risks of what we just discussed. Unfortunately, NATO it seems considers itself to be at war with
Russia. NATO and the European Union leaders ... they bluntly, publicly and persistently say Putin
must fail, Russia must be defeated. ... As soon as these [Western] weapons are reaching Ukrainian territory, they are fair game for our special operation.246
Lavrov made similar remarks again on May 1, claiming that his nuclear statements had been misrepresented by Western media.
The Western mass media and Western politicians misrepresent what Russian institutions say.
When they talk about [nuclear] threats and ask me how real these threats are, I always answer
like this: Russia has never stopped making agreements that will ensure that war will not
emerge. We proposed to our American colleagues to repeat what Gorbachev and Reagan had
said in 1987 and to accept a declaration confirming that a nuclear war would have no winners.
We could not convince the Trump administration, but the Biden administration agreed. And in
2021 in Geneva, Putin and Biden accepted that declaration on our initiative. There was also a
proposal by Putin to convene a summit of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, but the United States and Britain put the brakes on it